<p style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>>  gd2md-html alert:  ERRORs: 0;
WARNINGs: 0; ALERTS: 3.</p> <ul style="color: red; font-weight: bold"><li>See
top comment block for details on ERRORs and WARNINGs. <li>In the converted
Markdown or HTML, search for inline alerts that start with >>>>>  gd2md-html
alert:  for specific instances that need correction.</ul>

<p style="color: red; font-weight: bold">Links to alert messages:</p><a
href="#gdcalert1">alert1</a> <a href="#gdcalert2">alert2</a> <a
href="#gdcalert3">alert3</a>

<p style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>> PLEASE check and correct alert
issues and delete this message and the inline alerts.<hr></p>
# Local Collision Avoidance

Consider a rectangle. If we were to double the length and width of the box, we
_quadruple_ the total area ‚Äì the area of a 2D object increases much faster than
its characteristic length. We sometimes refer to this phenomena, and others like
it, as _the curse of dimensionality_. The basic idea is that when there are
decisions to be made, adding more factors to consider is _really_ slow.

We are using this rectangle to represent the world map in DownFlux. One of the
fundamental things we need to do in a real-time strategy game is to order units
to move around the map. Pathfinding techniques such as A\* are great with
finding the optimal global path ‚Äì but for large maps, we have to search _a lot_
due to the curse. This problem balloons when we consider the amount of units
that can typically generate in a RTS, e.g. on the order of thousands.
Furthermore, remember that all of these units have hitboxes ‚Äì when we run
pathfinding, not only do we need to ensure units do not collide with walls, we
also need to make sure units don't collide with _one another_. As the units are
all moving, the only way we can do this within the A\* framework is to
recalculate the paths. A lot.

Putting all of this together, we expect that pathfinding will be a significant
drain on our computing resources, of which we have very little when taking into
consideration these computations will all need to be completed within the
fraction of a second comprising a server tick.

In order to reduce the pathfinding computation time then, it appears we need to
tackle the problem in two fronts ‚Äì

1. find a way to apply the results of a single A\* calculation to multiple
units, and
2. reduce the number of A\* pathfinding calculations which need to occur due to
potential collisions

A common command pattern in real-time strategy games is for a player to issue a
move command to an entire group of units. A natural inclination then, is to run
A\* only on the single move target for all the units currently selected. But
doing so will naturally generate numerous collision events as the units converge
on a common target ‚Äì so we need a way to calculate local unit movement without
falling back to A\*. We need _local collision avoidance detection_.

## ORCA

Optimal Reciprocal Collision Avoidance (ORCA) is a technique which guarantees
local collision avoidance for a set of independent agents; that is, we can
simulate a bunch of moving objects, and ensure that the objects do not overlap,
without (or with very limited) knowledge of any global state. This is incredibly
applicable to our problem because we can bypass _all_ collision detection A\*
invocations, which in theory will drastically reduce the computational load

ORCA achieves collision avoidance in two steps ‚Äì


1. calculating all agent-agent interactions and coming up with a characteristic
velocity which avoids collisions (essentially `f(a, b) -> v`), and
2. given all such velocities, calculate a velocity for each agent that accounts
for all potential upcoming collisions (i.e., a fold operation
`g({v<sub>a</sub>}) -> v`)

When we apply these steps to all agents, we will get an agent `{a: v}` map,
where there is a guarantee no collisions will occur if the agent sets their
velocity to the prescribed output. What remains is to describe how these two
steps actually work. We will focus on the characteristic collision avoidance
velocity here, and leave the second step to a future post.

Consider two agents that are currently moving towards each other.

<p id="gdcalert1" ><span style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>>  gd2md-html
alert: inline image link here (to images/image1.png). Store image on your image
server and adjust path/filename/extension if necessary. </span><br>(<a
href="#">Back to top</a>)(<a href="#gdcalert2">Next alert</a>)<br><span
style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>> </span></p>

![alt_text](images/image1.png "image_tooltip")

Figure 1: Two agents in position (p-)space heading towards one another.

In order to determine if these two objects will collide, we can systematically
construct a velocity obstacle (VO) object in velocity (v-)space (Figure 2). The
VO object is defined by two fundamental properties ‚Äì


1. the shape of the central blockage[^1] of the VO object, and
2. the coordinates of the center-of-mass of this blockage is away from the
origin of v-space, which can be calculated from the relative velocities of the
two objects.

The shape of the central blockage is defined to be the set of all relative[^2]
velocities between two objects which will result in collision, and the VO "cone"
is built from extending a line from the origin to the edge of the blockage.

Any _relative_ velocity between the two objects that fall within this cone
indicates that the two objects will collide at some point in the future,
assuming the velocities stay constant.

<p id="gdcalert2" ><span style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>>  gd2md-html
alert: inline image link here (to images/image2.png). Store image on your image
server and adjust path/filename/extension if necessary. </span><br>(<a
href="#">Back to top</a>)(<a href="#gdcalert3">Next alert</a>)<br><span
style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>> </span></p>

![alt_text](images/image2.png "image_tooltip")

Figure 2: Velocity object between the two agents. The left figure demonstrates
the intuitive construction of a velocity cone between two objects ‚Äì here, we
find the velocities of the bottom agent that will result in the two agents
colliding. The right figure demonstrates a rough construction of the velocity
obstacle object created by the agents in Figure 1. Note that the circle here
defines the characteristic "width" of the cone, and whose radius is proportional
to r<sub>A</sub> + r<sub>B</sub>.

We note that the distance from the v-space origin to the collision artifact
(i.e. disc) is a function of time ‚Äì that is, we will only achieve a collision if
the velocity remains unchanged while the distance between the two agents
shrinks. If our simulation time is very short (smaller than the time it would
take to achieve collision) we should be able to proceed with the given velocity,
even if it will _eventually_ cause a collision. Thus, we can consider a
_truncated_ VO object, where the base of the circle has radius r<sub>0</sub> /
ùúè, and ùúè is the simulation timestep. For example, if we set

ùúè = 1

in Figure 2, the base of the truncated VO object is just the solid circle, and
the VO object points away from the origin. To reiterate, relative velocities
between the two agents which fall inside this truncated cone will cause a
collision within the next timestep.

Given a VO cone, it becomes fairly simple to generate a velocity which will
avoid collision ‚Äì this is the projected normal vector **u** onto the edge of VO.
Because the algorithm is _reciprocal_, we can assume[^3] the opposing agent will
also move to avoid the collision ‚Äì thus, we only need to alter the velocity of
each agent by ||**u**||/2 (directed away from one another in p-space). Note
_any_ relative velocity outside the VO object will ensure the two agents will
not collide ‚Äì because of reasons[^4], we narrow this search space to a
half-plane[^5] ORCA<sub>A|B</sub> for agent A, which is orthogonal to **u** and
passes through the minimally-adjusted velocity **v<sub>A</sub>** + **u**/2 (see
Figure 3).

<p id="gdcalert3" ><span style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>>  gd2md-html
alert: inline image link here (to images/image3.png). Store image on your image
server and adjust path/filename/extension if necessary. </span><br>(<a
href="#">Back to top</a>)(<a href="#gdcalert4">Next alert</a>)<br><span
style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>> </span></p>

![alt_text](images/image3.png "image_tooltip")

Figure 3: Construction of the ORCA half-plane of agent A given agent B. Note
that **u** points to the closest point on the VO object from the relative
velocity, and thus by definition is perpendicular to the surface of VO. Here,
F(ORCA<sub>A|B</sub>) indicates the direction of the half-plane ‚Äì that is, the
region in v-space which are permissible velocities for agent A.

We will leave discussion of how to use these ORCA planes to the next part.

## Works Cited

* van den Berg et al. "Reciprocal _n_-Body Collision Avoidance." 2011.  Snape et
* al. "Reciprocal Collision Avoidance and Navigation for Video Games." 2012.
* Sunshine-Hill, Ben. "RVO and ORCA: How They Really Work." 2017.  Snape, James.
* [snape/RVO2](https://github.com/snape/RVO2). 2021.

## Notes

[^1]:

     For two circular agents, this is a disc.

[^2]: Velocity objects generally are constructed for non-relativistic agents,
and the relative velocities are just the normal vector difference
**v<sub>A</sub>** - **v<sub>B</sub>**.

[^3]: This is a configurable value ‚Äì for example, we may make an agent with more
mass less liable to change its own velocity. This can be done either implicitly,
by refusing to alter the actual velocity of the more massive agent, at the cost
of potential collisions if the timestep is too large, or by feeding the
VO-generation library with a local weighting function (e.g. giving the more
massive agent a weighted velocity change value of ||**u**||/10, with the less
massive agent moving the remainder 9||**u**||/10).

[^4]: _Why_ we define this geometric object is due to math‚Ñ¢, but more details
can be found in van den Berg et al.

[^5]: Technically a hyperspace in N-dimensional ambient space (e.g. a half-space
if our velocity vectors have a z-component).
